Today we are going to talk about Japanese conjugation.

"Which particular conjugation?", you may ask. Well, all of them. Except for the た and て form, which we will discuss in a different video (Lesson 81).

Why are we dealing with them all at once?

Because we can. Because Japanese conjugation all works the same way.

It's very simple, very logical, and very consistent, and very very easy to understand.

However, when we look in the textbook, we get the impression of lots of different rules and forms that you have to learn for each particular conjugation.

Why is that? Why do the textbooks make it seem so complicated when it's actually so very simple?

Two reasons.

The first is that they insist on this European concept of conjugation. Actually, what we are doing is not conjugation at all.

### Intro to Conjugation

What we are doing all the time is attaching a simple helper verb – or helper adjective, or helper noun – to the stems of the verb. And once we see how that works, it becomes very, very simple and easy to understand.

The other problem is that they spend a lot of time explaining the changes that take place in terms of the Roman sound system – the alphabet. But, in fact, that causes a lot of confusion and difficulty. Once we see it in the terms it actually exists in, that is to say, the *Japanese* sound system, it all becomes very logical.

I would say it is a 100% consistent, logical and simple – except there is one exception in the whole system, and there are two irregular verbs, so perhaps we had better say 99.9% logical, consistent and easy to understand.

All right.

So, let's give you the master chart, which will show you how all of this works.
チャートをください!

So, here is the familiar Japanese kana chart, with all the sounds of Japanese.

I've turned it on its side, for reasons which will become apparent shortly. All Japanese verbs end with one of the kana in the middle row – it looks like a column because I've turned it on its side. That is the う-row – う, く, す, つ, ぬ etc.

However, there is no verb ending in ゆ, so we can get rid of these two columns and simplify the chart.

Actually, there is only one verb that ends in ぬ – that's 死ぬ, to die – so we could get rid of that too and make it look even simpler, but I'm keeping it in for completeness.

So, every verb ends with one of the kana in the red box. Let's have an example of each of the possible endings: 

買う, buy; 聞く, hear; 話す, speak; 持つ, hold; 死ぬ, die; 飛ぶ, fly; 飲む, drink; 取る, take.

Now, as you can see, there are four other possible endings that the verbs could have, and in fact, each of those endings is used.

And when we use one of the other endings, the verb stops being a verb and becomes what I call a 'sticky stem', that is, a stem to which we stick something else.

### The い-stem

So, here is the い-stem.

```
- ます (masu)
- たい (tai)
- そう (sou)
```

Note: If you are wondering why そう is there, yet is not mentioned here. It’ll be in Lesson 24.

With the い-sticky stem, we change the う-row kana to the corresponding い-row kana.

So, 買う becomes 買い, 聞く becomes 聞き, 話す becomes 話し, and so forth.
What do we do with the 'い' row sticky stem?

#### Helper verb ます

Well, the thing that you have all seen, I'm sure, is we can attach the helper verb ます to the い-row sticky stem.

ます is not a conjugation. It is a verb. It is a helper verb and it attaches to the い-row sticky stem. It does not change the meaning of the verb, but it makes it polite.

So, 買う is the regular, informal version, meaning buy; 買います is the polite version.

聞く is the informal version, hear; 聞きます is the formal version.

#### Helper adjective たい

What else do we do with the い-row sticky stem? Well, we can attach the helper adjective たい.

たい is a helper adjective which means want.

So, 買いたい means want to buy; 聞きたい, want to hear; 話たい, want to speak, and so
forth. (Note: Whereas in English it is usually translated as a verb, in Japanese it is an adjective.)

#### Converting verbs into nouns

We also use the い-row sticky stem for attaching nouns in order to convert a verb into a new noun.

+ So, 買い物, that is buy-thing: it means shopping.
+ 飲み物, drink-thing, means a drink.
+ 話かた (かた means form or shape)...
+ 話かた means form of speaking, manner of speaking.

So now we know how to attach all these except for what are called "る-verbs", the ichidan verbs, and they are very very simple, because all you ever do with these, ever, is simply cut off the る and you have *all* the possible sticky stems of the ichidan verbs.

So 食べる becomes 食べ; 食べます is the polite form of the verb; 

食べたい, want to eat;  食べ物, eat-thing, food.

(Note: There also exists a noun 買い (it is a noun), that means shopping, buying, product etc.

So it is similar in meaning, I don’t know what the connection is between it and 買い物 or such, but just so that you know there are a few such cases. It also shows that not every word ending in い is automatically an Adjective, although the vast majority are... perhaps the い was some Kanji noun in the past too and now it no longer takes its Kanji form???, who knows…)

### The あ-stem

So now we come to the あ-row sticky stem, and this has one exception.

```
-ない (nai)
-れる (reru)
-せる (seru)
```

And you'll say, "Ah, languages! Full of exceptions!"

This is the only exception in the whole system, and it's a very natural one that you can well understand.

The う-ending verb does not become “かあ”, it becomes “かわ”, which is a lot easier to say, and understand in conversation, isn't it? So, かう does not become “かあない”, it becomes かわない.

(Note: In the comments under the video, there is an insightful comment by one “pycage” about this exception not actually even being an exception when one regards the history of Japanese. You can check it out if you are interested (o^▽^o) But it is a rather more advanced explanation.)

So what do we use the あ-ending stem for?

#### Helper adjective ない

I've already mentioned it (Lesson 7) – probably the most common use is to attach the helper adjective ない to the sticky stem of a verb.

It attaches to the あ-sticky stem, so 買う, buy, becomes 買わない, not buy; 聞く, hear, becomes 聞かない, not hear; 話す becomes 話さない, not speak, and so forth. Very simple.

#### The causative

We also use the あ-sticky stem for the causative and the so-called “passive” forms of verbs (the receptive), and these "conjugations" often give beginners quite a lot of trouble.

And I have made videos (later lessons) that show how simple they really are, how they work, what they mean, and how simple it really is if you understand them the way they actually are.

Today we are just going to look at the structure.

So, the causative form of a verb, which means to allow someone to do something or make someone do something, is formed by attaching the helper verb せる / させる to the あ-row sticky stem.

Now, I say せる / させる – what does that mean?

Well, it means that there are actually two forms of this helper verb.

せる attaches to all those sticky stems that we're working with – all the ones that change. (Note: Dolly here means the godan verbs.)

And させる attaches to the ichidan – the so-called "る-verb" – sticky stem. Where there is a slight variation in the helper verb, we always find that the longer version goes onto the ichidan verb, because that verb is generally shorter.

The ichidan verb, we take off the whole last syllable; with the godan verbs, the changing sticky stems, we don't take off the last syllable, we change it to a different sound.

So, せる / させる makes the causative form of a verb.

+ ・買う becomes 買わせる, allow to buy, make to buy; 
+ ・話す becomes 話させる, allow to speak, make to speak; 

Note: 話す is a godan verb ending with す, so it changes to あ-stem + せる, which looks the same as the ichidan causative form of させる. Dolly explains stuff like this in the later lessons.

+ ・飲む, becomes 飲ませる, allow to drink, make to drink; 
+ ・食べる becomes 食べさせる, allow to eat, make to eat.

Note: 食べる is an ichidan verb, so it just deletes the る and adds させる to make the causative. 

#### The receptive / passive

The so-called passive – which isn't really passive, and we have a video helping you with understanding what it really does and how simple that really is – the so-called passive, the receptive form, is formed with the helper verb れる / られる.

So, 買う becomes 買われる, which means get bought, be bought, get bought – get bought is better because that is closer to what the Japanese really means, and you will understand that when you see the video (Lesson 13); 

+ ・聞く becomes 聞かれる, get heard;
+ ・飲む becomes 飲まれる, get drank – I don't mean become intoxicated, I mean the way the cup of coffee got drank; 
+ ・食べる becomes 食べられる, get eaten.

So as you see, there are really – apart from that one exception, there are not lots and lots of different ways of attaching these together.

It's because it's presented as a (“West-based”) conjugation and because it's explained as if it was written in Roman letters that the confusion arises.

We can see that it's actually very, very regular.

We just shift to the あ-row and add the helper adjective ない, the helper verb れる / られる, and the helper verb せる / させる, and it's just as simple as that.

### The え-stem

Now we come to the え-row sticky stem.

Just like the others, it's perfectly consistent. You just change the う-row kana into the corresponding え-row kana.

So 買う becomes 買え, 聞く becomes 聞け, 話す becomes 話せ, and so forth.

#### The potential

We use the え-row sticky stem to create the potential form of verbs, which means you “can do” the verb.

The helper verb, which is stuck onto the え-row sticky stem, is る / られる. And yes, even though it's simply る, just that one character, it is a helper verb – if you look it up in a Japanese dictionary (not a Japanese-English dictionary, but a real Japanese dictionary), you will find る there as a 助動詞/じょどうし, a helper verb – and it has these two forms, る and られる.

られる is, you will have noticed, the same as the so-called passive (the receptive), れる / られる, so the ichidan form of the passive and the potential are the same – but because they are used very differently, there are very very few occasions on which you would confuse the two, so it's not really a problem.

So, we have 買える, can buy; 聞ける, can hear; 話せる, can speak, and so forth; 
plus 食べられる, can eat. Note: can as in “is possible / is able”, later on that in Lesson 10.

### The お-stem

So, now we come the last sticky stem, the お-row sticky stem, and just as with the others, it's perfectly consistent.

買う becomes 買お; 聞く becomes 聞こ; 話す becomes 話そ.

#### The volitional

And what we do with this sticky stem is attach う, and, as you know, う, when attached to お, generally lengthens the お.

So 買う doesn't become kao-u, it becomes 買おう/kaō;

(Note: Dolly is referring to pronunciation here, not saying individually o and u, but just long o.) 

聞く becomes 聞こう/kikō; 話す becomes 話そう/hanasō.

The volitional has a number of uses, and I'm only talking about structure here, so I'll just use one of the uses.

+ ・買う becomes 買おう, let's buy;
+ ・聞く becomes 聞こう, let's listen, let's hear; 
+ ・話す becomes 話そう, let's talk.

In the ichidan form, we add よう to the end of the ichidan sticky stem (and of course delete る).

So 食べる becomes 食べよう, let's eat.

One peculiarity of the volitional form is that you can also make it by changing the form of ます to use the volitional in its polite mode.

And when you do this, you say ましょう instead of ます, and when you do this, naturally enough, you use the い-row sticky stem, just as you do with the regular ます.

So, 行きましょう, let’s go.